Abins documentation: update "concepts" documentation (#26902)
mantidproject/mantid: docs/source/concepts/DynamicalStructureFactorFromAbInitio.rst

------------

The purpose of this document is to explain the link between theoretical and experimental :math:`S(\mathbf{Q}, \omega)` and to

> describe in general how theoretical S is calculated from from *ab initio* data by plugins in Mantid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
describe in general how the theoretical :math:`S` is calculated from from *ab initio* data by plugins in Mantid.
```

Author: Good catch

During an inelastic neutron scattering experiment, a sample is exposed to neutron flux and a response is recorded in the form of dynamical structure factor, :math:`S(\mathbf{Q}, \omega)`.

> In principle, one obtains a vibrational spectrum which can be quite difficult to analyse; in crystalline materials this

Reviewer: `materials this is`

> In principle, one obtains a vibrational spectrum which can be quite difficult to analyse; in crystalline materials this

Author: `that` is better, we're already conditional twice-over

related to the wavevector-dependent *phonon* spectrum.
In order to better understand experimental outputs, one can compare with results from modelling.
*Ab initio* calculations, especially within density-functional theory (DFT) [#Kohn1964]_, have proven quite successful in predicting vibrational spectra.

.. image:: ../images/dft_phonon_scheme.png
    :align: center

The usual workfow for calculating phonon spectra within DFT is presented in the figure above. First, one defines an

> initial guess for the structure in interest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
initial guess for the structure of interest.
```

The initial guess should be as close as possible to an experimental structure, and is usually derived from elastic X-ray and/or neutron scattering measurements.
Then the structure parameters are locally optimised within DFT, finding the nearest structure that minimises the DFT energy.

> At this point, there should be no effective force on the atoms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, there should be no effective net force on the atoms.
```

Author: It's *ab initio*, all forces should be "net"? We don't get a pairwise breakdown.

Reviewer: I was thinking in terms of the atomic potential and Hellman-Fynaman etc. I just added the word net to make it explicit as a non-expert may think it means zero forces, which is different to no net force.

Author: Ah, I see what you mean. I find "net" and "effective" to be redundant: I think I prefer `At this point, there should be no net force on the atoms.` which seems more precise.

For this "relaxed" structure the dynamical matrix is calculated, either by finite displacements or perturbation theory.
The dynamical matrix is related to the Hessian (the second derivative of system Hamiltonian with respect to atomic displacements) by a Fourier transform;
the eigenvectors obtained from diagonalisation of this matrix are atomic displacements

> and the eigenvalues are squared frequencies of vibrations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the eigenvalues are the frequencies of the vibrations squared.
```

Author: Vectors are hard to use in sentences. How about *"and the eigenvalues are the squared frequencies of the corresponding vibrations."* ?

These vibrational *modes* are related to the *fundamental* vibrational excitations of the system,

> and using this displacement and frequency information one can calculate theoretical :math:`S(\mathbf{Q}, \omega)`.

Reviewer: we shouldn't have and so close to each other

In Abins :math:`S(\mathbf{Q}, \omega)` is calculated for each atom separately.

> The total S is then obtained as a sum over all partial atomic contributions.

Reviewer: math font

Author: Or kill the repetition and give more context:
```rst
In Abins :math:`S(\mathbf{Q}, \omega)` is calculated for each atom separately;
the total spectrum is then obtained as a sum over all partial atomic contributions.
```

.. image:: ../images/s_powder_scheme.png
    :align: center

> In DFT studies of solid materials, one usually applies periodic boundary conditions representing an infinite single crystal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In DFT studies of solid materials, one usually applies periodic boundary conditions to represent an infinite single crystal.
```

Author: Not quite the same implication, but it does read better. (We don't always choose PBC because we _want_ an infinite crystal, but using PBC means we always have one.)

Reviewer: yes, I missed that. Just need to tighten up the language.

> In order to compare such calculations with experiments in which the sample is in the form of powder, one has to perform

Reviewer: can we rewording this sentence, it is a bit unclear

powder averaging.

> Usually a semi-empirical model is applied [#Howard1983]_:sup:`,` [#Howard1983b]_:

Reviewer: this feels like half a sentence

Author: It's meant to be: it leads the reader into the equation. If we're going to do the "equations stuck between complete prose" thing then the equations should be numbered and those numbers consistently referred to in the text; that's a different style of writing (more textbook-y). The style in this page (including my edits!) is not super-consistent, but it feels more in-line with the "equations are part of the sentence" approach of e.g. APS journals. (Which also happens to be my preferred style :wink: )

Reviewer: I prefer the equations to flow from the text too. However, I just felt that one did not flow was somewhat abrupt.

with

> :math:`Q` -- momentum transfer which occurs during neutron scattering. In principle, momentum transfer :math:`\mathbf{Q}` is a vector but, due to powder averaging S depends only on the length of :math:`\mathbf{Q}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:math:`Q` -- momentum transfer due to neutron scattering.  The momentum transfer :math:`\mathbf{Q}` is a technically a vector. However, the powder averaging of :math: `S` allows it to be represented as a scalar.
```

:math:`\sigma_j` -- cross-section for :math:`j`-th atom

> The formula above is valid for *first-order quantum events*, i.e. transitions :math:`0 \rightarrow 1` for each phonon. (We neglect events that transfer energy *to* the scattered neutron.)

Reviewer: is the bit in brackets for the sentence before?

Reviewer: How about:
```suggestion
The formula above is valid for *first-order quantum events*, i.e. transitions :math:`0 \rightarrow 1` for each phonon and the transfer of energy *to* the scattered neutrons are neglected.
```

Author: I find combing the sentences to be needlessly confusing. We could get more clarity with something like
```rst
The formula above covers the *first-order quantum events* -- specifically the transitions :math:`0 \rightarrow 1` for each phonon.
The :math:`1 \rightarrow 0` events (i.e. energy transfer *to* the scattered neutron) would be infrequent at experimental conditions and are neglected.
```

In order to reconstruct the full spectrum one has to also consider higher-order quantum events.

> For second-order quantum events one should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For second-order quantum events one should not only
```

consider transitions :math:`0 \rightarrow 2`, but also simultaneous transitions :math:`0 \rightarrow 1`, :math:`0 \rightarrow 1'` for different phonons.
Within the harmonic approximation all second-order transitions form the following set: :math:`\lbrace \omega_1 +
\omega_1, \omega_1 + \omega_2, \omega_1 + \omega_3, \ldots, \omega_p + \omega_p \rbrace`.
The cardinality of this set is :math:`p^2`, where :math:`p` is a number of fundamentals.

> In practice one can reduce this number by taking into consideration a realistic energy window

Reviewer: but if omega_j is large?

Author: I've been wondering the same thing. Still, this is documentation of how Abins works _at the moment_. I'd like to examine this approximation more in future...

Reviewer: but it makes no sense due to the symmetry. If a is large and b is small, we are saying:
to use a+b
but that b+a is negligible. This will always be true as addition is commutative

and neglecting those :math:`\omega_{ij}=\omega_i + \omega_j` for which :math:`S(Q, \omega_i)` is negligible.

> Within the harmonic approximation each phonon is treated as independent harmonic quantum oscillator.  The formula for :math:`S(Q, \omega_{ik})` is as follows [#Mitchell]_:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the harmonic approximation phonons are treated as independent harmonic quantum oscillators.  The formula for :math:`S(Q, \omega_{ik})` is as follows [#Mitchell]_:
```

:math:`S^j(Q, \omega_{ik}) = \frac{Q^4}{15  C}\left( TrB^j_{\omega_i}TrB^j_{\omega_k} + B^j_{\omega_i}:B^j_{\omega_k} + B^j_{\omega_k}:B^j_{\omega_i} \right) exp\left(-Q^2 \beta^j coth^2\left(\frac{\hbar \omega_{ik}}{2 k_B T} \right) \right)\sigma^j`

where

:math:`\beta^j = A^j / 3`.

:math:`C` is a constant: if :math:`i=j` then :math:`C=2`, otherwise :math:`C=1`.

Similarly, one can define the contribution for the third quantum order events (:math:`0 \rightarrow 3`, simultaneous  :math:`0 \rightarrow 1`, :math:`0 \rightarrow 1'`, :math:`0 \rightarrow 1''` for different oscillators, etc.) [#Mitchell]_:

> :math:`S^j(Q, \omega_{ikl}) = \frac{9Q^6}{543}\left( TrB^j_{\omega_i} TrB^j_{\omega_k} TrB^j_{\omega_l}  \right)  exp\left(-Q^2 \beta^j coth^2\left(\frac{\hbar \omega_{ikl}}{2 k_B T}\right) \right)\sigma^j`.

Reviewer: Is Tr the trace?

> Usually in order to reconstruct the experimental spectrum it is sufficient to include contributions up to the fourth order (:math:`0 \rightarrow 4` , simultaneous :math:`0 \rightarrow 1`, :math:`0 \rightarrow 1'`, :math:`0 \rightarrow 1''`, :math:`0 \rightarrow 1'''` for different oscillators, etc.)

Reviewer: the equation doesn't follow on from this sentence, it is just kind of there

:math:`S^j(Q, \omega_{iklm}) = \frac{27Q^8}{9850}\left( TrB^j_{\omega_i} TrB^j_{\omega_k} TrB^j_{\omega_l}TrB^j_{\omega_m}  \right) exp\left(-Q^2 \beta^j coth^2\left(\frac{\hbar \omega_{iklm}}{2 k_B T}\right) \right)\sigma^j`. [#Mitchell]_

> In the same way as for the second quantum order events, one can reduce the number of energy transitions by imposing the appropriate energy window and neglecting small S.

Reviewer: math font on S

> After evaluating the above equations one obtains the discrete S for each quantum order and for each atom: :math:`S_{discrete}`. In order to compare these functions with an experimental spectrum one has to convolve them with experimental resolution

Reviewer: maths font on S. Should it the `S_{discrete}` be `S_\text{discrete}` ?

:math:`S_\mathrm{theory}^{nj}(Q, \omega) = S_\mathrm{discrete}^{nj}(Q, \omega) * f(\omega)`

where:

:math:`j` -- indicates :math:`j`-th atoms

:math:`n` -- indicates :math:`n`-order event

:math:`f(\omega)` -- is a resolution function

> :math:`S_\mathrm{theory}` -- is *theoretical S* to be compared with experimental results.

Reviewer: why is it S* and shouldnt it be in math mode

with :math:`A`, :math:`B`, :math:`C` as constants.

> Moreover, in case of TOSCA and TOSCA-like instruments length of momentum transfer depends on frequency (*indirect geometry spectrometer*).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, in case of TOSCA and TOSCA-like instruments, the length of momentum transfer depends on frequency (*indirect geometry spectrometer*).
```

with

:math:`E_{final}` -- being the final energy on the crystal analyser in :math:`cm^{-1}` and

:math:`\theta` -- is the crystal analyser angle in radians. (TOSCA has two angles to consider, corresponding to the forward- and back-scattering detectors).

Current implementation
----------------------

> Calculation of theoretical S from ab-initio results is implemented in :ref:`Abins <algm-Abins>`. At the moment Abins supports phonon outputs from the

Reviewer: math
